Hey welcome back! So, in this video we're going to start actually
filling our game space with bricks!
So firstly, let's lose this extra Ball
that we have up here. And we're going to create something called a
prefab, which is a prefabricated
object. Unity's documentation says that it is "a
collection of predefined GameObjects & Components that are
re-usable throughout your game", and you can read more about it
here. Great! So,
what it basically means is, we can take a rich object like this Paddle,
that has multiple components, a Transform, a
Sprite Renderer, a Box Collider, a Rigidbody, and even a script on
it, and we can reuse that multiple places,
at times and different places. So, let's start
by making a folder called Prefabs.
It's not a special folder name. You could call it something else, but that is my
suggestion. And we need
to create our first prefab! The way you do that is, you take a GameObject
and you drag it down, but don't drag Paddle yet.
And what I want to do is duplicate the Paddle, because if I
was to drag Paddle now, well see what happens when you drag the
duplicate. The duplicate, in the Hierarchy,
goes blue. It's difficult to see but if you compare that
Paddle, where you have the word Prefab under the Inspector,
Select, Revert, and Apply to this Paddle,
which has not got those things, you can see the difference.
The other way to see the difference is that it's slightly blue in the Hierarchy.
How do I drag the first Paddle? I would have prefabbed
the actual Paddle. I don't want that, because we're not actually making a
Paddle here, so let's rename it straight away. I'm making
a 1 hit block, and where is that 1
hit block? Well, it's sitting over the Paddle, so let's move it!
Great! In fact, let's move it perfectly! Let's move it
a bit up or like this too. Maybe
X = 8, Y = 10, let's
say, so it's right up here in the middle. Great!
So, what else is not quite right about this
1 hit block? Well, we don't need a Paddle Script on it,
for sure. So, let's remove that component.
Now, I'm removing it here from the instance, but the
prefab is not changing. You see, I've taken the script
off the instance, but it's like a template,
the prefab. That can't changed, so I could change
the template by clicking this, Prefab Apply.
It's going to apply that change to the Prefab. Click on the Prefab,
and you see there's no script component. Great,
so we're on our way! Let's now make this a
different color, because I think it just makes a lot of sense to
immediately change the color. I'm actually going to use the color picker to
pick something from the background. That should
do! Let's see what it looks like in the Game View!
It's a bit too dark, it's not very visible!
In fact, my background is too too too light,
actually! I'm going to turn the alpha down on my background, even more.
Just make it disappear a bit more.
Actually, I don't really like my background! 50!
I mean I don't mind it but it's kind of, I don't know! I need
to change something about the color. Let's just see if we can make the background a little
bit more, kind of I don't know, dark I think is the
answer.
That's OK! I'll leave it
like that! It's just a little bit devoid. See, let's focus on choosing
this bricks tint, to be nice and visible. Ah, there you
go! That bright yellow, that's a very clear
clear color! So again, I've changed it on the
instance. Have I changed it on the prefab? No! So, if you do that by
mistake, click Apply, and that applies the change of the
instance to the prefab. The other way around, if I change
something on the prefab, like for instance let's just massively change it's
scale and go back to the instance, it's immediately
changed. In fact, if we had several of these bricks, it would all be different.
And this is the whole benefit of the prefab is
that, if you then change the prefab, all the instances
immediately change. You see that!
If we then go into one of the instances and make a change to it,
that figure goes bold. You see how this 0.74 is
bold and the 1 and the 1 aren't? That's because it's different to the
prefab. I could Apply, which would make all of the prefabs the same
as this one, or I could
revert, which would take it back to the prefab's settings.
Does that make sense? Revert takes it back to the prefab settings,
Apply changes the prefab, and
finds the prefab for me. Great! So, I'm
going to set my prefab's X width back to 1.
Well, I'll leave all of the bricks in.
I'm going to make an organizing GameObject, actually, and I'm
going to call it Bricks.
Fine! I'm going to make this empty GameObject
just under the Play Space.
I need to get it at the right level. Let's put it
say here! I'm going to pop the LevelManager at the top.
I'm going to grab all my bricks and put them in the Bricks
game organizer, but I've made a mistake, because
I didn't reset the Transform of my Bricks
organizer. That's OK, I can reset it now! That's not a problem!
And then, I can move each of the bricks independently,
but remember, organizing objects like that should always have a transform of
0. Great! So, now I've got three bricks
in the play space. Now, let's lay these out somewhere.
I'm going to go for 8,
10, and then,
I'm going to put this one next to it, at maybe 7,
10. Now, I will be showing you, in another video, how to
do this using a snap setting. We're not going to be covering that here, because it's a
video in it's own right, but let's just
try an X setting of
9. And you can see this would very quickly become tedious! There
you go! So, I have 8, 9, and 10! I have three blocks
up there. That's quite cool! And
let's go back to this prefab. So, it wants a collider on it.
Now, should they be rigid bodies
or not? Well,
it's a good question! We want the ball to bounce off of it, but we're going to be
using a script to destroy the
bricks, so we
don't actually need a Rigidbody. In fact, if we go back
in our slide, to the bit where we were understanding
colliders and collisions, then we can use the table
in there to decide what
we want to be doing here. So, let's just go back and look at that table,
for a minute! The ball is definately
a Rigidbody Collider, Non-Kinematic,
and we want collisions to occur, because we want the Physics
Engine to work for us. The bricks could have Static
Colliders on them. That's the simplest case, actually, because they
don't move during the game. So, provided they're not
moving the simplest thing to do is make them Static Colliders,
which means, they do not have on them a
...
... Rigidbody at all, so we can remove that component
like that. So, this is becoming a much simpler
brick. There's three instances of the 1 hit brick
and they're all sitting there. Let's see what happens if we
fire the ball at them now! Ah, that's good!
No sound yet, of course, and
various other potential game play issues, but look, at least it's bouncing off of
them. Fantastic! So,
the final thing we want to do, in this video, is to
organize for those bricks to have a script on them,
that can keep track of how many times they've been hit.
So, add a component to the prefab,
actually, and let's call it
Brick, simple as that. Now,
let's make sure that script is in the scrips folder.
And now, let's go into the Brick
Script!
And let's just give it a publicly, for the moment at least,
exposed variable called...
And it's an integer, you use an integer when you can
count things. When it's a natural 1, 2, 3, use an integer. So
public int maxHits
OK. And that's going to
tell us how many times this thing can be hit,
as a maximum. And we'll put also another public int
called timesHit;
And that's going to keep track of how many times it's been
hit. On the Start, we're going to make the timeHit
= to 0;
which make sense. At the beginning of the game, it hasn't been hit.
Now, what I want you to do is I want
you to use the OnCollisionEnter2D
function, and I want you to intercept the
message, the OnCollisionEnter2D message, like we have done
before and increment the number of times hit,
every time there's a collision. And you'll know that that's working,
because over in the Editor, what you'll be able to do
is you'll be able to click on one of these bricks. And you
may want to just go down to one brick. In fact, I will go down to one brick,
for simplicity. You click on your brick and you're going to see this
Times Hit increase, every time the ball hits it OK.
So, that's not happening yet, but I want to write you the code so that when
the ball hits the brick, the Times Hit increases.
So, please pause the video and do that now.
OK welcome back! So, how are we going to do that? Well,
what we need to do is use the void
OnCollisionEnter2D
method or message
that's passed. And it's a collision that comes in here, but it's a
2D collision, remember not a collider, Collision2D.
OK, and that's the
method that gets called! And all we want to do is timesHit
= timesHit + 1
Or alternatively, a more compact way of writing
that is just timesHit ++;
It just increments by 1, is such a common thing to want to do in a program.
Let's try it!
Perfect!
The Times Hits just increased, and I'm confident that it will continue
to increase as we move on.
OK, now Maximum Hits 0 is a bit rubbish!
A brick with a Maximum Hits of 0 is a bit odd, so let's
make this one's Maximum Hits...
Well, 0 is OK! It's OK
as a general rule, because it's going to remind us
to change it for each prefab. So, what we want to do next
is go to the Prefabs and say, well OK we have this
brick here and it has these properties on it. I
don't think we need timesHit exposed publicly anymore,
so I would actually like to make timesHit private right now
so we don't change the wrong thing. So, we have
a public maxHits, which is the property of the Brick, and internally
kept quietly kept private timesHit,
which is set to 0 at the Start and Updated every time
the thing is hit. Great! Let's look back in Unity!
When you play, we've now got a nice simple
outline for this brick, OK. So, what I
want to do... I'm collapsing down the Sprite Renderer and Box Collider.
...is I want you to make another two, a minimum of two
more bricks, each of which is going to have a
different Max Hits, maybe 1 and 2,
and each of which is going to have a different tint color, which will be under
the Sprite Renderer. OK, so I'm going to set this one's Max
Hits to 1. Now, what that does is it
overrides whatever is in the script, actually, but we
don't actually give a value in the script. Remember over in the script
we've declared this variable but not initialized it. So,
we're giving it its value here in the Inspector,
which is a nice natural place. So, that's what I want you to
do now. I want you to pause the video, create at least two more
brick prefabs for me, give
them different colors and max number of hits,
and then, delete all non-prefab instances of
bricks, except the paddle if you've got any in the scene.
And test it all by playing and checking the
Inspector. OK,
see you soon!
Cool! Welcome back! So, let's just get this done quickly!
I'm going to duplicate the prefab, with the Control D key.
I'm just going to call it 2 hit,
and I don't know, let's have a 3 hit.
I'm going to change the color of the 2 hit to
something else. I can't really see how
that works, until I drop it in the scene. That green is OK
for me. And then, the 3 hit will maybe make a red
color. Again, drop one in the scene,
and see, that red is a bit glary.
I might try and pick a dark red from here or something.
No, I'm just going to go
with a red, even if it is a bit rude.
There you go! So, we have these three different
types of brick. Now, let's make sure we orgainze them into
our bricks object, and
give them sensible names. 1 hit, 2...
It should just be 1 hit.
Sorry 2 hit! That's my problem, I'm trying to rename something twice!
OK, so we have three bricks in the play space, a 1 hit, a 2
hit, and a 3 hit brick. I'm just going to move them around,
so they can all be hit quite easily.
I need to just change one more thing about these prefabs. The prefabs Max Hits
is 1., the 2 hit prefab has 2,
and the 3 hit has 3. Let's run!
And that's fine! There's bouncing
off them all, and they all have different
maximum numbers of hits. So, now you can start really constructing your
play space. I wouldn't go crazy yet, because I'm going to shortly
show you how to use Snap to Grid
to make this a lot easier for yourself. Congratulations
and I shall see you soon!